<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-55" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      LV. The Comtesse de L'Estorade to Mme. Gaston July 16th.
    </h2>
    <p>
      My dear Louise,—I send this letter by an express before hastening to
      the chalet myself. Take courage. Your last letter seemed to me so frantic,
      that I thought myself justified, under the circumstances, in confiding all
      to Louis; it was a question of saving you from yourself. If the means we
      have employed have been, like yours, repulsive, yet the result is so
      satisfactory that I am certain you will approve. I went so far as to set
      the police to work, but the whole thing remains a secret between the
      prefect, ourselves and you.
    </p>
    <p>
      In one word, Gaston is a jewel! But here are the facts. His brother, Louis
      Gaston, died at Calcutta, while in the service of a mercantile company,
      when he was on the very point of returning to France, a rich, prosperous,
      married man, having received a very large fortune with his wife, who was
      the widow of an English merchant. For ten years he had worked hard that he
      might be able to send home enough to support his brother, to whom he was
      devotedly attached, and from whom his letters generously concealed all his
      trials and disappointments.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then came the failure of the great Halmer house; the widow was ruined, and
      the sudden shock affected Louis Gaston's brain. He had no mental energy
      left to resist the disease which attacked him, and he died in Bengal,
      whither he had gone to try and realize the remnants of his wife's
      property. The dear, good fellow had deposited with a banker a first sum of
      three hundred thousand francs, which was to go to his brother, but the
      banker was involved in the Halmer crash, and thus their last resource
      failed them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Louis' widow, the handsome woman whom you took for your rival, arrived in
      Paris with two children—your nephews—and an empty purse, her
      mother's jewels having barely sufficed to pay for bringing them over. The
      instructions which Louis Gaston had given the banker for sending the money
      to his brother enabled the widow to find your husband's former home. As
      Gaston had disappeared without leaving any address, Mme. Louis Gaston was
      directed to d'Arthez, the only person who could give any information about
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      D'Arthez was the more ready to relieve the young woman's pressing needs,
      because Louis Gaston, at the time of his marriage four years before, had
      written to make inquiries about his brother from the famous author, whom
      he knew to be one of his friends. The Captain had consulted d'Arthez as to
      the best means of getting the money safely transferred to Marie, and
      d'Arthez had replied, telling him that Gaston was now a rich man through
      his marriage with the Baronne de Macumer. The personal beauty, which was
      the mother's rich heritage to her sons, had saved them both—one in
      India, the other in Paris—from destitution. A touching story, is it
      not?
    </p>
    <p>
      D'Arthez naturally wrote, after a time, to tell your husband of the
      condition of his sister-in-law and her children, informing him, at the
      same time, of the generous intentions of the Indian Gaston towards his
      Paris brother, which an unhappy chance had frustrated. Gaston, as you may
      imagine, hurried off to Paris. Here is the first ride accounted for.
      During the last five years he had saved fifty thousand francs out of the
      income you forced him to accept, and this sum he invested in the public
      funds under the names of his two nephews, securing them each, in this way,
      an income of twelve hundred francs. Next he furnished his sister-in-law's
      rooms, and promised her a quarterly allowance of three thousand francs.
      Here you see the meaning of his dramatic labors and the pleasure caused
      him by the success of his first play.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mme. Gaston, therefore, is no rival of yours, and has every right to your
      name. A man of Gaston's sensitive delicacy was bound to keep the affair
      secret from you, knowing as he did, your generous nature. Nor does he look
      on what you give him as his own. D'Arthez read me the letter he had from
      your husband, asking him to be one of the witnesses at his marriage.
      Gaston in this declares that his happiness would have been perfect but for
      the one drawback of his poverty and indebtedness to you. A virgin soul is
      at the mercy of such scruples. Either they make themselves felt or they do
      not; and when they do, it is easy to imagine the conflict of feeling and
      embarrassment to which they give rise. Nothing is more natural than
      Gaston's wish to provide in secret a suitable maintenance for the woman
      who is his brother's widow, and who had herself set aside one hundred
      thousand francs for him from her own fortune. She is a handsome woman,
      warm-hearted, and extremely well-bred, but not clever. She is a mother;
      and, you may be sure, I lost my heart to her at first sight when I found
      her with one child in her arms, and the other dressed like a little lord.
      The children first! is written in every detail of her house.
    </p>
    <p>
      Far from being angry, therefore, with your beloved husband, you should
      find in all this fresh reason for loving him. I have met him, and think
      him the most delightful young fellow in Paris. Yes! dear child, when I saw
      him, I had no difficulty in understanding that a woman might lose her head
      about him; his soul is mirrored in his countenance. If I were you, I
      should settle the widow and her children at the chalet, in a pretty little
      cottage which you could have built for them, and adopt the boys!
    </p>
    <p>
      Be at peace, then, dear soul, and plan this little surprise, in your turn,
      for Gaston.
    </p>
    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
