<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      XXV. Renee de L'Estorade to Louise de Chaulieu
    </h2>
    <p>
      Saucy girl! Why should I write? What could I say? Whilst your life is
      varied by social festivities, as well as by the anguish, the tempers, and
      the flowers of love—all of which you describe so graphically, that I
      might be watching some first-rate acting at the theatre—mine is as
      monotonous and regular as though it were passed in a convent.
    </p>
    <p>
      We always go to bed at nine and get up with daybreak. Our meals are served
      with a maddening punctuality. Nothing ever happens. I have accustomed
      myself without much difficulty to this mapping out of the day, which
      perhaps is, after all, in the nature of things. Where would the life of
      the universe be but for that subjection to fixed laws which, according to
      the astronomers, so Louis tells me, rule the spheres! It is not order of
      which we weary.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then I have laid upon myself certain rules of dress, and these occupy my
      time in the mornings. I hold it part of my duty as a wife to look as
      charming as possible. I feel a certain satisfaction in it, and it causes
      lively pleasure to the good old man and to Louis. After lunch, we walk.
      When the newspapers arrive, I disappear to look after my household affairs
      or to read—for I read a great deal—or to write to you. I come
      back to the others an hour before dinner; and after dinner we play cards,
      or receive visits, or pay them. Thus my days pass between a contented old
      man, who has done with passions, and the man who owes his happiness to me.
      Louis' happiness is so radiant that it has at last warmed my heart.
    </p>
    <p>
      For women, happiness no doubt cannot consist in the mere satisfaction of
      desire. Sometimes, in the evening, when I am not required to take a hand
      in the game, and can sink back in my armchair, imagination bears me on its
      strong wings into the very heart of your life. Then, its riches, its
      changeful tints, its surging passions become my own, and I ask myself to
      what end such a stormy preface can lead. May I not swallow up the book
      itself? For you, my darling, the illusions of love are possible; for me,
      only the facts of homely life remain. Yes, your love seems to me a dream!
    </p>
    <p>
      Therefore I find it hard to understand why you are determined to throw so
      much romance over it. Your ideal man must have more soul than fire, more
      nobility and self-command than passion. You persist in trying to clothe in
      living form the dream ideal of a girl on the threshold of life; you demand
      sacrifices for the pleasure of rewarding them; you submit your Felipe to
      tests in order to ascertain whether desire, hope, and curiosity are
      enduring in their nature. But, child, behind all your fantastic stage
      scenery rises the altar, where everlasting bonds are forged. The very
      morrow of your marriage the graceful structure raised by your subtle
      strategy may fall before that terrible reality which makes of a girl a
      woman, of a gallant a husband. Remember that there is not exemption for
      lovers. For them, as for ordinary folk like Louis and me, there lurks
      beneath the wedding rejoicings the great "Perhaps" of Rabelais.
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not blame you, though, of course, it was rash, for talking with
      Felipe in the garden, or for spending a night with him, you on your
      balcony, he on his wall; but you make a plaything of life, and I am afraid
      that life may some day turn the tables. I dare not give you the counsel
      which my own experience would suggest; but let me repeat once more from
      the seclusion of my valley that the viaticum of married life lies in these
      words—resignation and self-sacrifice. For, spite of all your tests,
      your coyness, and your vigilance, I can see that marriage will mean to you
      what it has been to me. The greater the passion, the steeper the precipice
      we have hewn for our fall—that is the only difference.
    </p>
    <p>
      Oh! what I would give to see the Baron de Macumer and talk with him for an
      hour or two! Your happiness lies so near my heart.
    </p>
    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
