<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      VI. Don Felipe Henarez to Don Fernand Paris, September.
    </h2>
    <p>
      The address of this letter, my brother, will show you that the head of
      your house is out of reach of danger. If the massacre of our ancestors in
      the Court of Lions made Spaniards and Christians of us against our will,
      it left us a legacy of Arab cunning; and it may be that I owe my safety to
      the blood of the Abencerrages still flowing in my veins.
    </p>
    <p>
      Fear made Ferdinand's acting so good, that Valdez actually believed in his
      protestations. But for me the poor Admiral would have been done for.
      Nothing, it seems, will teach the Liberals what a king is. This particular
      Bourbon has been long known to me; and the more His Majesty assured me of
      his protection, the stronger grew my suspicions. A true Spaniard has no
      need to repeat a promise. A flow of words is a sure sign of duplicity.
    </p>
    <p>
      Valdez took ship on an English vessel. For myself, no sooner did I see the
      cause of my beloved Spain wrecked in Andalusia, than I wrote to the
      steward of my Sardinian estate to make arrangements for my escape. Some
      hardy coral fishers were despatched to wait for me at a point on the
      coast; and when Ferdinand urged the French to secure my person, I was
      already in my barony of Macumer, amidst brigands who defy all law and all
      avengers.
    </p>
    <p>
      The last Hispano-Moorish family of Granada has found once more the shelter
      of an African desert, and even a Saracen horse, in an estate which comes
      to it from Saracens. How the eyes of these brigands—who but
      yesterday had dreaded my authority—sparkled with savage joy and
      pride when they found they were protecting against the King of Spain's
      vendetta the Duc de Soria, their master and a Henarez—the first who
      had come to visit them since the time when the island belonged to the
      Moors. More than a score of rifles were ready to point at Ferdinand of
      Bourbon, son of a race which was still unknown when the Abencerrages
      arrived as conquerors on the banks of the Loire.
    </p>
    <p>
      My idea had been to live on the income of these huge estates, which,
      unfortunately, we have so greatly neglected; but my stay there convinced
      me that this was impossible, and that Queverdo's reports were only too
      correct. The poor man had twenty-two lives at my disposal, and not a
      single <i>real</i>; prairies of twenty thousand acres, and not a house;
      virgin forests, and not a stick of furniture! A million piastres and a
      resident master for half a century would be necessary to make these
      magnificent lands pay. I must see to this.
    </p>
    <p>
      The conquered have time during their flight to ponder their own case and
      that of their vanquished party. At the spectacle of my noble country, a
      corpse for monks to prey on, my eyes filled with tears; I read in it the
      presage of Spain's gloomy future.
    </p>
    <p>
      At Marseilles I heard of Riego's end. Painfully did it come home to me
      that my life also would henceforth be a martyrdom, but a martyrdom
      protracted and unnoticed. Is existence worthy the name, when a man can no
      longer die for his country or live for a woman? To love, to conquer, this
      twofold form of the same thought, is the law graven on our sabres,
      emblazoned on the vaulted roofs of our palaces, ceaselessly whispered by
      the water, which rises and falls in our marble fountains. But in vain does
      it nerve my heart; the sabre is broken, the palace in ashes, the living
      spring sucked up by the barren sand.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here, then, is my last will and testament.
    </p>
    <p>
      Don Fernand, you will understand now why I put a check upon your ardor and
      ordered you to remain faithful to the <i>rey netto</i>. As your brother
      and friend, I implore you to obey me; as your master, I command. You will
      go to the King and will ask from him the grant of my dignities and
      property, my office and titles. He will perhaps hesitate, and may treat
      you to some regal scowls; but you must tell him that you are loved by
      Marie Heredia, and that Marie can marry none but a Duc de Soria. This will
      make the King radiant. It is the immense fortune of the Heredia family
      which alone has stood between him and the accomplishment of my ruin. Your
      proposal will seem to him, therefore, to deprive me of a last resource,
      and he will gladly hand over to you my spoils.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will then marry Marie. The secret of the mutual love against which you
      fought was no secret to me, and I have prepared the old Count to see you
      take my place. Marie and I were merely doing what was expected of us in
      our position and carrying out the wishes of our fathers; everything else
      is in your favor. You are beautiful as a child of love, and are possessed
      of Marie's heart. I am an ill-favored Spanish grandee, for whom she feels
      an aversion to which she will not confess. Some slight reluctance there
      may be on the part of the noble Spanish girl on account of my misfortunes,
      but this you will soon overcome.
    </p>
    <p>
      Duc de Soria, your predecessor would neither cost you a regret nor rob you
      of a maravedi. My mother's diamonds, which will suffice to make me
      independent, I will keep, because the gap caused by them in the family
      estate can be filled by Marie's jewels. You can send them, therefore, by
      my nurse, old Urraca, the only one of my servants whom I wish to retain.
      No one can prepare my chocolate as she does.
    </p>
    <p>
      During our brief revolution, my life of unremitting toil was reduced to
      the barest necessaries, and these my salary was sufficient to provide. You
      will therefore find the income of the last two years in the hands of your
      steward. This sum is mine; but a Duc de Soria cannot marry without a large
      expenditure of money, therefore we will divide it. You will not refuse
      this wedding-present from your brigand brother. Besides, I mean to have it
      so.
    </p>
    <p>
      The barony of Macumer, not being Spanish territory, remains to me. Thus I
      have still a country and a name, should I wish to take up a position in
      the world again.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thank Heaven, this finishes our business, and the house of Soria is saved!
    </p>
    <p>
      At the very moment when I drop into simple Baron de Macumer, the French
      cannon announce the arrival of the Duc d'Angouleme. You will understand
      why I break off....
    </p>
    <p>
      October.
    </p>
    <p>
      When I arrived here I had not ten doubloons in my pocket. He would indeed
      be a poor sort of leader who, in the midst of calamities he has not been
      able to avert, has found means to feather his own nest. For the vanquished
      Moor there remains a horse and the desert; for the Christian foiled of his
      hopes, the cloister and a few gold pieces.
    </p>
    <p>
      But my present resignation is mere weariness. I am not yet so near the
      monastery as to have abandoned all thoughts of life. Ozalga had given me
      several letters of introduction to meet all emergencies, amongst these one
      to a bookseller, who takes with our fellow-countrymen the place which
      Galignani holds with the English in Paris. This man has found eight pupils
      for me at three francs a lesson. I go to my pupils every alternate day, so
      that I have four lessons a day and earn twelve francs, which is more than
      I require. When Urraca comes I shall make some Spanish exile happy by
      passing on to him my connection.
    </p>
    <p>
      I lodge in the Rue Hillerin-Bertin with a poor widow, who takes boarders.
      My room faces south and looks out on a little garden. It is perfectly
      quiet; I have green trees to look upon, and spend the sum of one piastre a
      day. I am amazed at the amount of calm, pure pleasure which I enjoy in
      this life, after the fashion of Dionysius at Corinth. From sunrise until
      ten o'clock I smoke and take my chocolate, sitting at my window and
      contemplating two Spanish plants, a broom which rises out of a clump of
      jessamine—gold on a white ground, colors which must send a thrill
      through any scion of the Moors. At ten o'clock I start for my lessons,
      which last till four, when I return for dinner. Afterwards I read and
      smoke till I go to bed.
    </p>
    <p>
      I can put up for a long time with a life like this, compounded of work and
      meditation, of solitude and society. Be happy, therefore, Fernand; my
      abdication has brought no afterthoughts; I have no regrets like Charles
      V., no longing to try the game again like Napoleon. Five days and nights
      have passed since I wrote my will; to my mind they might have been five
      centuries. Honor, titles, wealth, are for me as though they had never
      existed.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now that the conventional barrier of respect which hedged me round has
      fallen, I can open my heart to you, dear boy. Though cased in the armor of
      gravity, this heart is full of tenderness and devotion, which have found
      no object, and which no woman has divined, not even she who, from her
      cradle, has been my destined bride. In this lies the secret of my
      political enthusiasm. Spain has taken the place of a mistress and received
      the homage of my heart. And now Spain, too, is gone! Beggared of all, I
      can gaze upon the ruin of what once was me and speculate over the
      mysteries of my being.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why did life animate this carcass, and when will it depart? Why has that
      race, pre-eminent in chivalry, breathed all its primitive virtues—its
      tropical love, its fiery poetry—into this its last offshoot, if the
      seed was never to burst its rugged shell, if no stem was to spring forth,
      no radiant flower scatter aloft its Eastern perfumes? Of what crime have I
      been guilty before my birth that I can inspire no love? Did fate from my
      very infancy decree that I should be stranded, a useless hulk, on some
      barren shore! I find in my soul the image of the deserts where my fathers
      ranged, illumined by a scorching sun which shrivels up all life. Proud
      remnant of a fallen race, vain force, love run to waste, an old man in the
      prime of youth, here better than elsewhere shall I await the last grace of
      death. Alas! under this murky sky no spark will kindle these ashes again
      to flame. Thus my last words may be those of Christ, <i>My God, Thou hast
      forsaken me!</i> Cry of agony and terror, to the core of which no mortal
      has ventured yet to penetrate!
    </p>
    <p>
      You can realize now, Fernand, what a joy it is to me to live afresh in you
      and Marie. I shall watch you henceforth with the pride of a creator
      satisfied in his work. Love each other well and go on loving if you would
      not give me pain; any discord between you would hurt me more than it would
      yourselves.
    </p>
    <p>
      Our mother had a presentiment that events would one day serve her wishes.
      It may be that the longing of a mother constitutes a pact between herself
      and God. Was she not, moreover, one of those mysterious beings who can
      hold converse with Heaven and bring back thence a vision of the future?
      How often have I not read in the lines of her forehead that she was
      coveting for Fernand the honors and the wealth of Felipe! When I said so
      to her, she would reply with tears, laying bare the wounds of a heart,
      which of right was the undivided property of both her sons, but which an
      irresistible passion gave to you alone.
    </p>
    <p>
      Her spirit, therefore, will hover joyfully above your heads as you bow
      them at the altar. My mother, have you not a caress for your Felipe now
      that he has yielded to your favorite even the girl whom you regretfully
      thrust into his arms? What I have done is pleasing to our womankind, to
      the dead, and to the King; it is the will of God. Make no difficulty then,
      Fernand; obey, and be silent.
    </p>
    <p>
      <i>P. S.</i> Tell Urraca to be sure and call me nothing but M. Henarez.
      Don't say a word about me to Marie. You must be the one living soul to
      know the secrets of the last Christianized Moor, in whose veins runs the
      blood of a great family, which took its rise in the desert and is now
      about to die out in the person of a solitary exile.
    </p>
    <p>
      Farewell.
    </p>
    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
