<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      III. The Same to the Same December.
    </h2>
    <p>
      My Darling,—Here I am ready to make my bow to the world. By way of
      preparation I have been trying to commit all the follies I could think of
      before sobering down for my entry. This morning, I have seen myself, after
      many rehearsals, well and duly equipped—stays, shoes, curls, dress,
      ornaments,—all in order. Following the example of duelists before a
      meeting, I tried my arms in the privacy of my chamber. I wanted to see how
      I would look, and had no difficulty in discovering a certain air of
      victory and triumph, bound to carry all before it. I mustered all my
      forces, in accordance with that splendid maxim of antiquity, "Know
      thyself!" and boundless was my delight in thus making my own acquaintance.
      Griffith was the sole spectator of this doll's play, in which I was at
      once doll and child. You think you know me? You are hugely mistaken.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here is a portrait, then, Renee, of your sister, formerly disguised as a
      Carmelite, now brought to life again as a frivolous society girl. She is
      one of the greatest beauties in France—Provence, of course,
      excepted. I don't see that I can give a more accurate summary of this
      interesting topic.
    </p>
    <p>
      True, I have my weak points; but were I a man, I should adore them. They
      arise from what is most promising in me. When you have spent a fortnight
      admiring the exquisite curves of your mother's arms, and that mother the
      Duchesse de Chaulieu, it is impossible, my dear, not to deplore your own
      angular elbows. Yet there is consolation in observing the fineness of the
      wrist, and a certain grace of line in those hollows, which will yet fill
      out and show plump, round, and well modeled, under the satiny skin. The
      somewhat crude outline of the arms is seen again in the shoulders.
      Strictly speaking, indeed, I have no shoulders, but only two bony blades,
      standing out in harsh relief. My figure also lacks pliancy; there is a
      stiffness about the side lines.
    </p>
    <p>
      Poof! There's the worst out. But then the contours are bold and delicate,
      the bright, pure flame of health bites into the vigorous lines, a flood of
      life and of blue blood pulses under the transparent skin, and the fairest
      daughter of Eve would seem a Negress beside me! I have the foot of a
      gazelle! My joints are finely turned, my features of a Greek correctness.
      It is true, madame, that the flesh tints do not melt into each other; but,
      at least, they stand out clear and bright. In short, I am a very pretty
      green fruit, with all the charm of unripeness. I see a great likeness to
      the face in my aunt's old missal, which rises out of a violet lily.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is no silly weakness in the blue of my insolent eyes; the white is
      pure mother-of-pearl, prettily marked with tiny veins, and the thick, long
      lashes fall like a silken fringe. My forehead sparkles, and the hair grows
      deliciously; it ripples into waves of pale gold, growing browner towards
      the centre, whence escape little rebel locks, which alone would tell that
      my fairness is not of the insipid and hysterical type. I am a tropical
      blonde, with plenty of blood in my veins, a blonde more apt to strike than
      to turn the cheek. What do you think the hairdresser proposed? He wanted,
      if you please, to smooth my hair into two bands, and place over my
      forehead a pearl, kept in place by a gold chain! He said it would recall
      the Middle Ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      I told him I was not aged enough to have reached the middle, or to need an
      ornament to freshen me up!
    </p>
    <p>
      The nose is slender, and the well-cut nostrils are separated by a sweet
      little pink partition—an imperious, mocking nose, with a tip too
      sensitive ever to grow fat or red. Sweetheart, if this won't find a
      husband for a dowerless maiden, I'm a donkey. The ears are daintily
      curled, a pearl hanging from either lobe would show yellow. The neck is
      long, and has an undulating motion full of dignity. In the shade the white
      ripens to a golden tinge. Perhaps the mouth is a little large. But how
      expressive! what a color on the lips! how prettily the teeth laugh!
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, dear, there is a harmony running through all. What a gait! what a
      voice! We have not forgotten how our grandmother's skirts fell into place
      without a touch. In a word, I am lovely and charming. When the mood comes,
      I can laugh one of our good old laughs, and no one will think the less of
      me; the dimples, impressed by Comedy's light fingers on my fair cheeks,
      will command respect. Or I can let my eyes fall and my heart freeze under
      my snowy brows. I can pose as a Madonna with melancholy, swan-like neck,
      and the painters' virgins will be nowhere; my place in heaven would be far
      above them. A man would be forced to chant when he spoke to me.
    </p>
    <p>
      So, you see, my panoply is complete, and I can run the whole gamut of
      coquetry from deepest bass to shrillest treble. It is a huge advantage not
      to be all of one piece. Now, my mother is neither playful nor virginal.
      Her only attitude is an imposing one; when she ceases to be majestic, she
      is ferocious. It is difficult for her to heal the wounds she makes,
      whereas I can wound and heal together. We are absolutely unlike, and
      therefore there could not possibly be rivalry between us, unless indeed we
      quarreled over the greater or less perfection of our extremities, which
      are similar. I take after my father, who is shrewd and subtle. I have the
      manner of my grandmother and her charming voice, which becomes falsetto
      when forced, but is a sweet-toned chest voice at the ordinary pitch of a
      quiet talk.
    </p>
    <p>
      I feel as if I had left the convent to-day for the first time. For society
      I do not yet exist; I am unknown to it. What a ravishing moment! I still
      belong only to myself, like a flower just blown, unseen yet of mortal eye.
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of this, my sweet, as I paced the drawing-room during my
      self-inspection, and saw the poor cast-off school-clothes, a queer feeling
      came over me. Regret for the past, anxiety about the future, fear of
      society, a long farewell to the pale daisies which we used to pick and
      strip of their petals in light-hearted innocence, there was something of
      all that; but strange, fantastic visions also rose, which I crushed back
      into the inner depths, whence they had sprung, and whither I dared not
      follow them.
    </p>
    <p>
      My Renee, I have a regular trousseau! It is all beautifully laid away and
      perfumed in the cedar-wood drawers with lacquered front of my charming
      dressing-table. There are ribbons, shoes, gloves, all in lavish abundance.
      My father has kindly presented me with the pretty gewgaws a girl loves—a
      dressing-case, toilet service, scent-box, fan, sunshade, prayer-book, gold
      chain, cashmere shawl. He has also promised to give me riding lessons. And
      I can dance! To-morrow, yes, to-morrow evening, I come out!
    </p>
    <p>
      My dress is white muslin, and on my head I wear a garland of white roses
      in Greek style. I shall put on my Madonna face; I mean to play the
      simpleton, and have all the women on my side. My mother is miles away from
      any idea of what I write to you. She believes me quite destitute of mind,
      and would be dumfounded if she read my letter. My brother honors me with a
      profound contempt, and is uniformly and politely indifferent.
    </p>
    <p>
      He is a handsome young fellow, but melancholy, and given to moods. I have
      divined his secret, though neither the Duke nor Duchess has an inkling of
      it. In spite of his youth and his title, he is jealous of his father. He
      has no position in the State, no post at Court, he never has to say, "I am
      going to the Chamber." I alone in the house have sixteen hours for
      meditation. My father is absorbed in public business and his own
      amusements; my mother, too, is never at leisure; no member of the
      household practises self-examination, they are constantly in company, and
      have hardly time to live.
    </p>
    <p>
      I should immensely like to know what is the potent charm wielded by
      society to keep people prisoner from nine every evening till two or three
      in the morning, and force them to be so lavish alike of strength and
      money. When I longed for it, I had no idea of the separations it brought
      about, or its overmastering spell. But, then, I forget, it is Paris which
      does it all.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is possible, it seems, for members of one family to live side by side
      and know absolutely nothing of each other. A half-fledged nun arrives, and
      in a couple of weeks has grasped domestic details, of which the master
      diplomatist at the head of the house is quite ignorant. Or perhaps he <i>does</i>
      see, and shuts his eyes deliberately, as part of the father's <i>role</i>.
      There is a mystery here which I must plumb.
    </p>
    
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
